KAPALONG, Davao del Norte (PIA) -- Reelected Mayor Ma. Theresa Timbol stood pat on her duty to ensure the welfare of her people when she helped secure the return of Ata-Manobo villagers to Kapalong.

"Despite the insistence of CPP-NPA terrorists and their front organizations to permeate our communities, the municipal government of Kapalong shall continue to follow the path of peace," Timbol said in a statement released on Tuesday (May 21). The NPA (New People's Army) is the armed wing of the CPP (Communist Party of the Philippines).

She made the statement following the homecoming of 31 members of Ata-Manobo tribe who escaped from UCCP (United Church of Christ in the Philippines) Haran compound in Davao City on May 18.

Timbol recalled the "steadfast" stand of the local government unit (LGU) of Kapalong in 2016 when it refused to yield to the influence of CPP-NPA and its allies "on how it should facilitate the homecoming of the 'UCCP Haran Bakwits'".

In a separate interview, Timbol revealed that there were earlier batches of Kapalong Ata Manobo residents who were assisted by Kapalong LGU in returning to their home village of Gupitan.

"This is not the first time. There were other batches since 2016 na umuwi na po ng Barangay Gupitan,"she said.

In fact, in 2016 Timbol issued EO 15 that created the Task Force Tu Poglibong in order to facilitate the safe homecoming of indigenous peoples (IP) from Haran.

Timbol also disclosed that the 31 Ata Manobos left Haran out of their own free will.

"Sila ang humingi na tulong sa LGU na gusto na nilang umuwi (They asked for help from the LGU because they wanted to go home)," she said.

Timbol said it was a relative of one of the families who relayed to her the information regarding their desire to go back to Gupitan.

"Nung nagpunta doon ang aming dumptruck (when our dumptruck went there), we were surprised that other families ay sumama na rin sa kanila. Kaya naging anim na pamilya: 21 minors, 10 adults," she said.

"Ginagawa lahat ng paraan na maibalik sa normal ang buhay ng members ng tribes na galing ng UCCP Haran sa Davao City (We are doing all means to bring back to normal the lives of tribe members from UCCP Haran in Davao City)," she said.

As regards Task Force Tu Poglibong, she said in her statement: "With our commitment to peace effectively institutionalized in this mechanism, the new batch of IP families who have escaped from UCCP Haran on May 18, 2019 after staying there for over five years, can rest assured that the LGU is ready to embrace them back and help them to positively recreate their lives."

Timbol showed some photos and video shots how the Ata Manobos climbed through the perimeter fence of the Haran compound.

On May 21, Timbol visited the place where she had the homebound Ata Manobos hosted since May 18. She did a final checking of their concerns before having them board on a Kapalong LGU-owned dump truck en-route home to Sitio Tiabong in Barangay Gupitan, some 70 kilometers from Poblacion Kapalong, Davao del Norte.

The 31 Ata-Manobos families were accompanied by representatives of LGU Kapalong, the 60th Infantry Battalion, Philippine Information Agency, and Department of Education's Kapalong District. (PIA-XI)
